---
layout: default
permalink: /:title
---

Matrix
======

Let's talk about matrix.

The addition of matrix works pretty much the same way as that of two numbers.

The definition of multiplication is $AB=\begin{pmatrix}Ab_1 & Ab_2 \cdots & Ab_p\end{pmatrix}$. It is in fact make $A$ multiply each vector $b_i$ in $B$. The commutativity in general doesn't hold, that is $AB \neq BA$.  For power of matrix, $A^k=A \cdots A$, especially, $A^0=I$.

$(AB)C=A(BC)$
$A(B+C)=AB+AC$
$(B+C)A=BA+CA$
$r(AB)=A(rB)=(rA)B$
$IA=AI=A$

For transpose of matrix, note that $(AB)^T =B^TA^T $.

$(A^T)^T=A$
$(A+B)^T=A^T+B^T$
$(AB)^T=B^TA^T$

If $CA=I$, then $A$ is invertible. If $A$ is invertible, $Ax=b$ for every $b$ in $R^n$ has unique solution $x=A^{-1}b$.

$(A^{-1})^{-1}=A$
$(AB)^{-1}=B^{-1}A^{-1}$
$(A^T)^{-1}=(A^{-1})^T$

There is a relation between the elementary matrix and the inverse of matrix. An elementary matrix is obtained by performing a single row operation on an identity matrix. Also, we know $EI = E$ where $E$ is an elementary matrix. What is good is that row operations are reversible, this implies that if we can transform $I$ to $E$ by multiplying $I$ by $E$, we can always find another elementary matrix $F$ such that $F$ transforms $E$ back to $I$ by multiplying $E$ by $F$. Using this property, we could find an algo that computes $A^{-1}$. The row operations that transform $A$ to $I$ will transform $I$ to $A^{-1}$.

We can use the similar idea to factorize $A$. One famous factorization is $LU$ factorization, where $L$ is lower triangle matrix and $U$ is upper triangle matrix(echelon form). If A can be transformed to U by simple row operations, then we have $(E^1...E^n)A=U$, which is $A={(E^1...E^n)}^{-1}U$, so $L={(E^1...E^n)}^{-1}$. This is the very similar idea works: row operations that transform $A$ to $U$ transform $L$ to $I$. Question like why L has to be a lower triangle matrix can be easily answered using proof by contradiction. By LU factorization, we transform $Ax=b$ to two equations $Ux=y$ and $Ly=b$, and solving them is faster then finding $A^{-1}$ in general, much faster when $A$ is sparse.

We can view partitioned matrix as just normal matrix. The addition works only for matrices of same size and same partitioning way. The multiplication rule signifies that you can think each partition as scalar, you need only to pay attention to the way that each matrix is partitioned: the split of the cols of the left matrix must be exactly the same as that of the rows of the right matrix, this also implies that the split of the rows of the left matrix and the split of the cols of the right matrix are unimportant. The special case when the number of splits of the cols of the left matrix equals to number of cols, and the number of splits of the rows of the right matrix equals to number of rows, this gives us $AB=(col_{a1}row_{b1}+...+col_{an}row_{bn})$

A subspace is an important set of vectors in $R^n$ that satisfies three properties:

1. $0$ is in the set
2. $u+v$ is in the set if $u$ and $v$ are in the set
3. $cu$ is in the set if $u$ is in the set

All linear combinations of $v_1,v_2,...,v_p$ or $Span(v_1,v_2,...,v_p)$ is a subspace of $R^n$, you can refer it the subspace spanned by $v_1,v_2,...,v_p$. $0$ is another subspace of $R^n$.

Column space of $A$ or $Col$ $A$ is all linear combinations of columns of $A$. It forms a subspace of $R^n$.

Null space of $A$ or $Nul$ $A$ is the solution set of $Ax=0$. It forms a subspace of $R^n$.

Since there are often infinite vectors in a subspace, it's convenient to find a finite number of them that spans the subspace. If linear independent, this small set of vectors is called basis for the subspace.

An $n\times n$ invertible matrix $A$ is a basis for all of $R^n$.  In particular, the set $\{e_1,...,e_n\}$ is called standard basis for $R^n$.

The basis for column space of A is just the pivot column of A, and the basis for null space of A is the vectors in parametric form in solution set of $Ax=0$.

One reason that we want to find basis for a subspace is that any vector in this subspace will be represented by this basis uniquely. In this case we have a coordinate system. Formally, if $B=\{b_1,b_2,...,b_p\}$ is a basis for subspace $H$, then the coordinate of any vector $x=c_1b_1+c_2b_2+...+c_pb_p$ is the vector $[c_1,c_2,...,c_p]^T$. This vector is also called $B-coordinate\ vector\ of\ x$.

The dimension of a subspace $H$, denoted dim $H$, is the number of the basis vector in $H$, the dimension of $zero\ vector$ is 0.

With the definition of dimension, we then give the definition of rank of a matrix. The rank of a matrix $A$ is the dimension of the column space of $A$.

A quick conclusion is that for $n$ columns matrix, $rank\ A + dim\ Nul\ A = n$. To see why, think of a 4 columns matrix, where it has 3 pivots and 1 free variable.

For a p-dimensional subspace $H$, any p linearly independent vector form a basis for $H$ and any set of p elements that spans $H$ forms a basis for $H$.