---
layout: default
permalink: /:title
---

XGBoost is one of the most popular tools in data science. Let' take a close look at it.

### Setting Up

#### Download source code
```python
git clone --recursive https://github.com/dmlc/xgboost.git
```

>**Note**: Since xgboost project containes dmlc, which is essential for its cross-platform and cross-framework purpose and yet is another project, you cannot simply download it via the 'clone or download' button on its web page. This is also the reason why we use 'recursive' option here.

#### Build Binary
Windows  
a) Download Visual Studio 2017 community version. During installation, select 'Desktop development with C++ '  under Workloads section,  check up 'Visual C++ tool for CMake' on the right if it is not yet,

b) Open Visual Studio 2017, import the project as Folder, since 2017 version, Visual Studio can recognize CMake project and will automatically do cmake once it finishes importing the project.

c) If it doesn't automatically do cmake after importing the project, you can do it yourself. First, add **cmake.exe** to your system PATH, for me, it's in C:\Program_Files_(x86)\Microsoft_Visual Studio\2017\Community\Common7\IDE\CommonExtensions\Microsoft\CMake\CMake\bin. Then open your cmd, go to your root folder of xgboost project, say it's d:\xgboost, then do the following, 

```python
mkdir build
cd build 
cmake .. -G "Visual Studio 15 2017"
```

If everything goes fine, you will find xgboost.sln along with a lot of other stuffs generated in build folder, open it with VS, compile the project with the green triangle button, if you're as lucky as me, you will find xgboost.exe in d:\xgboost and xgboost.dll in d:\xgboost\lib
  
