---
layout: default
permalink: /:title
---

Principal Component Analysis
============================

Principal component analysis is a technique used in data compression, data visualization and dimension reduction.

If only one term is allowed to tell the core idea of PCA, I'd choose <strong>change of basis</strong>.

What is the notion of change of basis? Given a vector $v$ coordinate in some basis $B$, $\lbrack a \rbrack_{B}$, if this basis is represented by another basis $B'$, or given a change of coordinates from matrix $B$ to $B'$, $\underset{B'\leftarrow{B}}{P}$, you have $\lbrack a \rbrack_{B'}=\underset{B'\leftarrow{B}}{P}\lbrack a \rbrack_{B}$.

With this notion in mind, let's see the following question, given x = (1,2) is the coordinates relative to the standard basis $B$, does there exist a change of coordinates from standard basis to some unknown basis $B'$ where when$y = \underset{B'\leftarrow{B}}{P}x$, yyT is a diagonal matrix.

The answer is yes, there is, and we can explicitly give the form this change of coordinates matrix. Here is how.
```python
import numpy as np

# x is a col vector (1,2)
x = np.array([[1],[2]])
# its transpose is a row vector (1,2)
xT = np.transpose(x)
print("x:",x)
print("xT:",xT)

# xxT is a symmetric matrix
xxT = np.dot(x, xT)
print("xxT:",xxT)

# we get eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix xxT
eigenvalues, eigenvectors = np.linalg.eig(xxT)
print("eigenvalues:", eigenvalues)
print("eigenvectors:", eigenvectors)

# if we use the eignvectors matrix as the change of the coordinates matrix
# let y = Mx
y = np.matmul(eigenvectors.T,x)
yT =y.T
# yyT is a diagonal matrix
yyT = np.dot(y,yT)
print("yyT:",yyT)
```

Let me explain why this works.

In linear algebra, given a symmetric matrix $A$, there is a decomposition of the form $A=Q\Lambda Q^T$ where $Q$ is the eigenvector matrix and $\Lambda$ is a diagonal matrix with eigenvalues in the diagonal position. Move $Q$ to the left side, we have $Q^T AQ=\Lambda$. We can construct $A$ by $xx^T$. Now $Q^T xx^T Q=\Lambda$. Here is the key part, let $y=Q^T x$, then $yy^T = Q^T x (Q^T x)^T=Q^T x x^T Q=\Lambda$. This is, that $yy^T$ is a diagonal matrix with values of eigenvalues of matrix $xx^T$. Cool.

Any relation with PCA? We know that the symmetric covariance matrix in PCA is $\Sigma=E(XX^T)=\frac{1}{m}\sum_{i=1}^m A_i $, where $A_i =x^{i}(x^{i})^T$, by the procedure we've just seen, we can transform $\Sigma$ to $\Lambda$ and this time the $\Lambda$ will have eigenvalues of $\Sigma$ in its diagonal position. What's good  in this case is that since $\Sigma$ is originally a covariance matrix, so is $\Lambda$, and all the covariances of $x_i x_j$ with $i \neq j$ is $0$, so we indeed DECORRELATE the data, furthermore since it's with the help of change of basis, the covariance itself doesn't change really, only its relative position in the space changes.